>> Stewart: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SATURDAY, AUGUST 20:
FIREFIGHTERS GAIN CONTROL OF A
HUGE WILDFIRE IN SOUTHERN
CALIFORNIA AS EVACUEES RETURN
HOME.
EMERGENCY RESPONDERS IN
LOUISIANA GO DOOR TO DOOR
SEARCHING FOR SURVIVORS OF THIS
WEEK'S FLOODS.
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
WHY SEXUALLY ACTIVE GAY MEN
CAN'T GIVE BLOOD.
NEXT, ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
ALISON STEWART.
>> Stewart: GOOD EVENING, AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
FIREFIGHTERS IN CALIFORNIA ARE
MAKING MORE PROGRESS CONTAINING
THE DEVASTATING WILDFIRE EAST OF
LOS ANGELES, ALLOWING TENS OF
THOUSANDS OF EVACUEES TO RETURN
TO THEIR HOMES TODAY, OR WHAT
REMAINS OF THOSE HOMES.
OFFICIALS SAY THE SO-CALLED
"BLUE CUT FIRE" IN SAN
BERNARDINO COUNTY HAS CHARRED AT
LEAST 58-SQUARE MILES BUT IS NOW
68% CONTAINED.
ALL BUT 7,000 OF THE 80,000
RESIDENTS ORDERED TO EVACUATE
THEIR HOMES EARLIER THIS WEEK
ARE CLEARED TO GO BACK.
OFFICIALS SAY THE FIRE HAS
DESTROYED MORE THAN 100 HOMES
AND MORE THAN 200 OTHER
BUILDINGS SINCE IT BROKE OUT ON
TUESDAY.
THE CAUSE OF THE FIRE REMAINS
UNDER INVESTIGATION.
A FIVE-YEAR DROUGHT HAS MADE
LARGE AREAS OF CALIFORNIA
SUSCEPTIBLE TO WILDFIRES.
BLAZES ARE ALSO BURNING IN SANTA
BARBARA COUNTY AND IN THE
MOUNTAINS NORTH OF SAN
FRANCISCO.
FLOODWATERS IN SOUTHERN
LOUISIANA ARE SLOWLY RECEDING,
ONLY TO REVEAL A LANDSCAPE OF
DESTRUCTION IN WHAT RELIEF
WORKERS ARE CALLING THE NATION'S
WORST NATURAL DISASTER SINCE
HURRICANE SANDY NEARLY FOUR
YEARS AGO.
THE FLOODS, TRIGGERED BY DAYS OF
TORRENTIAL RAIN, HAVE SOAKED
60,000 HOMES AND FORCED 4,000
PEOPLE INTO SHELTERS.
FIRST RESPONDERS HAVE RESCUED
MORE THAN 30,000 PEOPLE AND
HUNDREDS OF THEIR PETS.
AT LEAST 13 PEOPLE HAVE DIED.
OFFICIALS SAY MORE THAN 100,000
PEOPLE SO FAR HAVE FILED
APPLICATIONS FOR AID FROM FEMA,
THE FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
AGENCY.
IN ARIZONA, A FEDERAL JUDGE IS
RECOMMENDING CRIMINAL CHARGES
FOR THE CONTROVERSIAL SHERIFF
FOR THE PHOENIX METROPOLITAN
AREA, JOE ARPAIO.
IN AN OPINION ISSUED LATE
YESTERDAY, JUDGE MURRAY SNOW
FOUND ARPAIO AND HIS TOP DEPUTY
INTENTIONALLY VIOLATED COURT
ORDERS IN A RACIAL PROFILING
CASE.
THE ORDERS HAD BARRED ARPAIO'S
DEPARTMENT FROM STOPPING AND
DETAINING LATINO DRIVERS BASED
ON THE SUSPICION THEY MIGHT BE
ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS.
THE JUDGE SAID THE SHERIFF
CONTINUED THE PRACTICE FOR 18
MONTHS FOLLOWING THE ORDER.
THE DECISION TO CHARGE ARPAIO
WITH CRIMINAL CONTEMPT NOW RESTS
WITH FEDERAL PROSECUTORS.
IF CHARGED AND CONVICTED, ARPAIO
COULD FACE FINES AND JAIL TIME.
THE 84-YEAR OLD ARPAIO IS NOW
RUNNING FOR HIS SEVENTH FOUR-
YEAR TERM.
>> Stewart: 12% OF INMATES
SERVING SENTENCES FOR FEDERAL
CRIMES IN THE U.S. ARE
INCARCERATED IN PRIVATELY-RUN
PRISONS, BUT, ACCORDING TO A
REPORT BY THE JUSTICE DEPARTMENT
INSPECTOR GENERAL, THOSE PRISONS
ARE LESS SAFE AND MORE EXPENSIVE
THAN GOVERNMENT-RUN PRISONS.
THE FINDINGS LED THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT TO ANNOUNCE THIS WEEK
IT WILL BEGIN PHASING OUT
CONTRACTS WITH ALL PRIVATE
PRISONS.
TO EXPLORE HOW THAT DECISION WAS
REACHED AND ITS IMPACT, I AM
JOINED FROM WASHINGTON BY NPR
JUSTICE CORRESPONDENT CARRIE
JOHNSON.
AND, CARRIE, WHAT DID THE
JUSTICE DEPARTMENT IDENTIFY AS
THE BIGGEST PROBLEM FOR THESE
PRISONS RUN BY PRIVATE
COMPANIES?
>> THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY GENERAL,
SALLY YEATS, TOLD ME THAT
SIMPLY, GOVERNMENT-RUN PRISONS
OPERATE BETTER; BY CONTRACTING
OUT WITH PRIVATE COMPANIES, THE
GOVERNMENT SAVES VERY LITTLE
MONEY, AND IN FACT, RUNS INTO A
LOT MORE TROUBLE.
THE INSPECTOR GENERAL AT THE
JUSTICE DEPARTMENT FOUND
ASSAULTS, USES OF FORCE, AND
CONTRABAND, ESPECIALLY
CONTRABAND CELL PHONES, WERE
MUCH HIGHER AT PRIVATE PRISON
FACILITIES, RATHER THAN THE ONES
OPERATED BY THE FEDERAL BUREAU
OF PRISONS AROUND THE COUNTRY.
>> Stewart: WHY IS THERE MORE
TROUBLE IN PRIVATE PRISONS?
>> WELL, THERE ARE A COUPLE OF
ARGUMENTS ABOUT THAT.
ONE IS SOMEWHAT SOME OF THE
OPERATIONS AT PRIVATE PRISONS
ARE UNDERSTAFFED, BOTH IN TERMS
OF CORRECTION OFFICERS-- WHAT WE
WOULD CALL GUARDS -- AND ALSO
MEDICAL PERSONNEL.
AND INMATES THERE HAVE EXPRESSED
A LOT OF DISSATISFACTION ABOUT
THE QUALITY OF MEDICAL CARE
THEY'RE GETTING IN THESE PRIVATE
CONTRACT FACILITIES, AS WELL AS
THE QUALITY OF FOOD, SOMETIMES
NOT EVEN ENOUGH FOOD, THEY
COMPLAIN.
AND, OF COURSE, NOT ENOUGH
SUPERVISION FROM GUARDS, WHICH
ALLOWS SOME OF THESE CONTRABAND
CELL PHONES AND ASSAULTS ON
INMATES BY OTHER INMATES,
ASSAULTS ON INMATES AGAINST
GUARDS, AND THOSE ARE ALL ON
THE RISE, ACCORDING TO THE I.G.,
IN THESE PRIVATE CONTRACT
FACILITIES.
>> Stewart: IT SOUNDS LIKE IT
WAS A COMBINATION OF A DECISION
THAT WAS BOTH FINANCIAL AND
ABOUT SAFETY AND CONDITIONS?
>> YEAH, THAT'S RIGHT.
AND IN FACT, IT'S IMPORTANT TO
NOTE THE JUSTICE DEPARTMENT SAYS
THAT DEMAND FOR OUTSIDE PRISON
SPACE FOR PRIVATE CONTRACT
PRISON SPACE, HAS DECLINED A LOT
JUST IN THE LAST FEW YEARS.
IN THE LAST FEW YEARS ALONE,
25,000 INMATES IN FEDERAL
PRISONS HAVE LEFT THOSE
PRISONS BECAUSE OF CHANGING IN
THE WAY WE PUNISH LOW-LEVEL DRUG
CRIMINALS AND OTHER POLICY
DECISIONS.
SO THERE'S A LOT MORE SPACE IN
THE GOVERNMENT-RUN PRISONS TO
MOVE ABOUT 22,000 INMATES WHO
ARE NOW IN THE CONTRACT PRISONS
BACK INTO THE REGULAR
GOVERNMENT-OPERATED PRISONS.
DEMAND IS MUCH LOWER THAN IT WAS
BACK, SAY, IN THE '90s, WHEN
VIOLENT CRIME WAS ON THE RISE,
AND DRUG PUNISHMENTS,
PUNISHMENTS FOR DRUG CRIMES,
WERE VERY, VERY STEEP IN THOSE
DAYS.
>> Stewart: SENTENCING AND
PRISON REFORM ADVOCATES HAVE
HAILED THIS AS A WIN OF SOME
SORTS.
IS IT REALLY?
>> WELL, IT IS A BIG SYMBOLIC
VICTORY FOR PEOPLE WHO HAVE BEEN
PRESSING, INCLUDING THE
A.C.L.U., PRISONERS' RIGHTS
GROUPS AND OTHERS FOR A LONG
TIME AGAINST THE USE OF
PRIVATE-CONTRACT PRISONS.
THAT SAID, THIS DECISION BY THE
JUSTICE DEPARTMENT, AFFECTS ONLY
22,000 INMATES IN SOME FEDERAL
FACILITIES.
IT DOES NOT AFFECT THE VAST
MAJORITY OF PEOPLE INCARCERATED
IN THE U.S. IN STATE OR LOCAL
PRISONS.
AND JUST AS IMPORTANTLY, THIS
DECISION DOES NOT APPLY TO
IMMIGRATION DETAINEES, PEOPLE
WHO ARE IN THE COUNTRY
ILLEGALLY, AND WHO ARE DETAINED
AWAIT SOMETHING KIND OF DECISION
BY AN IMMIGRATION JUDGE.
THE DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND
SECURITY, AND IMMIGRATIONS
CUSTOMS ENFORCEMENT SAY THEY ARE
GOING TO CONTINUE TO USE PRIVATE
PRISONS AND THAT IS WHERE THE
FIGHT IS GOING TO MOVE IN THE
YEARS AHEAD.
>> Stewart: CARRIE JOHNSON
FROM NPR, THANKS FOR SHARING
YOUR REPORTING.
>> MY PLEASURE.
>> Stewart: THE U.S. FOOD AND
DRUG ADMINISTRATION IS
REEVALUATING A CONTROVERSIAL
BLOOD DONATION POLICY PUT IN
EFFECT IN THE 1980s TO STOP THE
SPREAD OF H.I.V. AND AIDS
THROUGH THE NATION'S BLOOD
SUPPLY.
THE POLICY, AS AMENDED LAST
YEAR, PROHIBITS ANY MAN WHO
REPORTS HAVING SEX WITH ANOTHER
MAN IN THE PAST 12 MONTHS FROM
DONATING BLOOD.
THE BAN EXISTS BECAUSE OF THE
RELATIVELY HIGH RATE OF H.I.V.
INFECTIONS AMONG GAY MEN
COMPARED TO OTHER DEMOGRAPHIC
GROUPS.
GAY RIGHTS ADVOCATES SAY THE BAN
IS NOT BASED ON GOOD SCIENCE AND
PERPETUATES A STIGMA REGARDING
GAY MEN AND H.I.V.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND'S IVETTE
FELICIANO TAKES A CLOSER LOOK.
A NOTE ABOUT THIS REPORT-- IT
CONTAINS DISCUSSIONS OF A SEXUAL
NATURE, INCLUDING CLINICALLY
EXPLICIT LANGUAGE, THAT MAY NOT
BE APPROPRIATE FOR ALL VIEWERS.
>> IT WOULD BE GREAT IF THESE
WERE COMPLETELY FILLED.
UGH, THAT ONE IS EMPTY.
>> Reporter: ON A RECENT FRIDAY
MORNING, IN STERLING, VIRGINIA,
THE STAFF AT INOVA BLOOD DONOR
SERVICES IS GEARING UP FOR A
BLOOD DRIVE AT A WASHINGTON
NATIONALS BASEBALL GAME.
INOVA SUPPLIES BLOOD PRODUCTS TO
25 HOSPITALS IN WASHINGTON D.C.,
MARYLAND, AND VIRGINIA.
MANAGER A.J. HUGHES ESTIMATES
THE DRIVE WILL NET THE CENTER
400 DONATIONS, HELPING REPLENISH
ITS LOW BLOOD SUPPLY.
>> SUMMER IS ALWAYS KIND OF A
TOUGH TIME FOR US.
WE HAVE A REALLY TOUGH TIME
GETTING DONORS IN.
WE HAVE TO DO MORE THINGS TO GET
BLOOD DRIVES.
>> Reporter: 28-YEAR-OLD SAM
BRINTON WOULD LIKE TO DONATE TO
THE INOVA CENTER BUT CAN'T
BECAUSE OF A 33-YEAR-OLD
GOVERNMENT BAN PREVENTING MEN
WHO HAVE SEX WITH MEN FROM
DONATING BLOOD.
THE POLICY, IMPLEMENTED BY THE
FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION AT
THE START OF THE AIDS EPIDEMIC,
REQUIRES GAY AND BISEXUAL MEN
LIKE BRINTON TO AFFIRM THEY'VE
ABSTAINED FROM SEX WITH MEN FOR
A WHOLE YEAR BEFORE GIVING
BLOOD.
>> AS A BISEXUAL, IF I WERE TO
SLEEP WITH WOMEN FOR THE NEXT
YEAR, F.D.A. SAYS, "WAY TO GO,
YOU'RE AN AWESOME PERSON, YOU'RE
ALLOWED TO GIVE BLOOD."
IF I SLEEP WITH MY BOYFRIEND FOR
THE NEXT YEAR, "YOU'RE A
HORRIBLE PERSON, AND YOU'RE NOT
ALLOWED TO GIVE TO THOSE WHO YOU
MIGHT WANT TO GIVE."
NOW THEY'RE NOT SAYING IT IN
SUCH EXPLICIT TERMS, BUT
LIMITATION PROVIDES STIGMA.
>> Reporter: A NATIONAL
SPOTLIGHT FELL ON THE F.D.A.'S
BLOOD DONATION RESTRICTION AFTER
THE MASS SHOOTING INSIDE A GAY
NIGHTCLUB IN ORLANDO, FLORIDA,
IN JUNE.
THE MORNING AFTER 102 PEOPLE
WERE SHOT-- 49 FATALLY-- THERE
WERE LONG LINES TO GIVE BLOOD.
HUNDREDS OF GAY MEN WERE TURNED
AWAY.
>> I WENT TO GO TRY TO GIVE
BLOOD AND AGAIN WAS TOLD, "NO."
YOU SEE ON THE TELEVISION,
PEOPLE, YOUR BROTHERS AND
SISTERS, BLEEDING IN THE
STREETS.
YOU SAW THAT VIDEO.
AND THERE'S NOTHING YOU CAN DO.
YOU'RE BEING TOLD, "NO, YOUR
BLOOD IS NOT WORTHY."
>> Reporter: FOR BRINTON, THE
REJECTION WAS ESPECIALLY
PAINFUL.
TWO GOOD FRIENDS, DREW LEINONEN
AND JUAN GUERRERO, HAD BEEN
KILLED INSIDE THE CLUB.
>> DREW AND JUAN HAD BEEN
DATING.
I HAD LITERALLY SEEN THEM THE
WEEK BEFORE.
>> Reporter: UNTIL RECENTLY, THE
BAN WAS EVEN STRICTER.
IN FACT, IT WAS PERMANENT.
THE POLICY DATES BACK TO 1982,
WHEN A BABY WAS INFECTED WITH
AIDS THROUGH A BLOOD
TRANSFUSION GIVEN AT THE
UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA SAN
FRANCISCO HOSPITAL.
SHORTLY AFTER, THE F.D.A., WHICH
REGULATES THE NATION'S BLOOD
SUPPLY, INSTITUTED A LIFETIME
BAN ON BLOOD DONATIONS FROM ALL
MEN WHO ADMITTED HAVING SEX WITH
OTHER MEN.
TODAY, BLOOD BANKS SCREEN FOR
H.I.V., THE VIRUS THAT CAUSES
AIDS, WITH AN ACCURACY RATE OF
99.99%, ACCORDING TO THE F.D.A.
TYPICALLY, ALL BLOOD DONATIONS
ARE SCREENED FOR H.I.V. TWICE.
ONE TEST CHECKS FOR THE DIRECT
PRESENCE OF H.I.V. GENETIC
MATERIAL, AND THE OTHER LOOKS
FOR ANTIBODIES PRODUCED BY THE
IMMUNE SYSTEM TO FIGHT H.I.V.
TODAY, THE ODDS OF GETTING AN
H.I.V. INFECTION THROUGH A BLOOD
TRANSFUSION ARE ONE IN 1.5
MILLION, LESS LIKELY THAN BEING
STRUCK BY LIGHTNING.
THE CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL
AND PREVENTION ESTIMATES THERE
WERE MORE THAN 9,000
TRANSFUSION-RELATED H.I.V.
TRANSMISSIONS BETWEEN 1981 AND
1985.
THEN, AS TESTING METHODS
IMPROVED, THE NUMBERS DROPPED TO
THE SINGLE DIGITS PER YEAR.
SINCE 2000, THERE HAVE BEEN ONLY
FOUR CONFIRMED CASES IN THE U.S.
STILL, AS OF 2014, 636,000
AMERICANS HAD DIED FROM AIDS.
1.2 MILLION PEOPLE IN THE U.S.
HAVE THE DISEASE, ACCORDING TO
THE C.D.C.
DR. PETER MARKS IS THE DIRECTOR
OF THE F.D.A.'S CENTER FOR
BIOLOGICS EVALUATION AND
RESEARCH.
DO YOU BELIEVE THAT THE F.D.A.'S
POLICY IS DISCRIMINATORY?
>> I DON'T BELIEVE IT'S
DISCRIMINATORY, BECAUSE I
BELIEVE IT'S NOT A POLICY THAT'S
BASED ON A SEXUAL ORIENTATION;
IT'S BASED ON KEEPING THE BLOOD
SUPPLY SAFE.
>> Reporter: WHILE GAY AND
BISEXUAL MEN HAVE THE HIGHEST
RATES OF NEW INFECTIONS,
ACCOUNTING FOR 67% OF ALL
DIAGNOSES IN 2014, MARKS SAYS
THE TERM "GAY" ISN'T USED IN THE
POLICY BECAUSE MANY MEN WHO
SLEEP WITH MEN DON'T ALWAYS
IDENTIFY AS GAY OR BISEXUAL.
>> IT'S NOT A GAY BLOOD BAN.
IT'S NOT ABOUT WHAT YOU CALL
YOURSELF.
IT'S ABOUT A BEHAVIOR.
AND THAT BEHAVIOR IS ASSOCIATED
WITH CERTAIN RISK.
AT THE RISK OF BLUSHING BEFORE
CAMERA, THE CLEAR THING THAT'S
MOST HIGHLY ASSOCIATED WITH THE
TRANSMISSION OF H.I.V. IS ANAL
RECEPTIVE INTERCOURSE.
AND THERE'S NO WAY AROUND THAT.
>> Reporter: BUT CLEARLY, MEN
WHO HAVE SEX WITH MEN AREN'T THE
ONLY PEOPLE ENGAGING IN THAT
SORT OF SEX.
>> THAT'S CORRECT, EXCEPT THAT
THEY'RE THE ONES THAT ARE
INVOLVED WITH THE HIGHEST RISKS
OF TRANSMITTING IT THROUGH THAT
MODE.
AND UNFORTUNATELY, WE KNOW THAT
ANAL RECEPTIVE INTERCOURSE IS
ASSOCIATED WITH A RELATIVELY
HIGH CONDOM FAILURE RATE EACH
EPISODE.
I UNDERSTAND PEOPLE WANT TO BE
ABLE TO DONATE BLOOD AND FEEL
THAT THEY'RE DOING GOOD.
AND I'VE HEARD, "WELL, WE USE
PROTECTION," OR, "I'M
MONOGAMOUS."
THE PROBLEM IS THAT IF YOU USE
PROTECTION EACH TIME, YOU MAY
NOT KNOW THAT IT FAILED.
AND UNFORTUNATELY, YOU COULD
HAVE BECOME INFECTED THEN.
>> Reporter: ANOTHER IMPORTANT
PLAYER IN THIS DEBATE IS BRIAN
CUSTER, A SENIOR INVESTIGATOR AT
SAN FRANCISCO'S BLOOD SYSTEMS
RESEARCH INSTITUTE, ONE OF THE
NATION'S LARGEST BLOOD
COLLECTORS.
CUSTER SPEARHEADED SEVERAL
STUDIES, WHICH LED THE F.D.A.
JUST LAST DECEMBER TO AMEND ITS
LIFETIME BAN ON BLOOD DONATIONS
FROM MEN WHO HAVE SEX WITH MEN,
TO A 12-MONTH DEFERRAL, MEANING
DONORS MUST HAVE ABSTAINED FROM
SEX WITH MEN DURING THAT TIME.
>> THERE ARE MANY REASONS WHY WE
DON'T ALLOW INDIVIDUALS TO
DONATE.
NOT BECAUSE THEY BELONG TO A
SPECIFIC GROUP, BUT BECAUSE THAT
GROUP OR THAT ISSUE OR THAT
BEHAVIOR COULD TRULY POSE A RISK
TO A BLOOD RECIPIENT.
AND IF IT COULD, THAT'S WHERE WE
ERR.
WE ERR ON THAT SIDE.
>> Reporter: IN FACT, CUSTER
SAYS ONLY FOUR IN TEN AMERICANS
ARE ELIGIBLE TO DONATE BLOOD AT
ANY GIVEN TIME BECAUSE OF A HOST
OF EVER-CHANGING F.D.A. BANS AND
DEFERRALS, LIKE THE RESTRICTIONS
FOR PEOPLE WHO HAVE TRAVELED TO
COUNTRIES WITH ZIKA OUTBREAKS,
PEOPLE WITH HEPATITIS C, SEX
WORKERS, INTRAVENOUS DRUG USERS,
AND ANYONE WHO RECENTLY GOT A
TATTOO OR PIERCING.
THE GAY MEN'S HEALTH CRISIS, A
NEW YORK-BASED ADVOCACY GROUP
THAT FORMED IN THE EARLY YEARS
OF THE AIDS EPIDEMIC, CONSIDERS
THE F.D.A. RULES FOR MEN WHO
HAVE SEX WITH MEN
DISCRIMINATORY.
KELSEY LOUIE IS THE
ORGANIZATION'S C.F.O.
>> BY BANNING A GROUP OF PEOPLE
FROM PARTAKING IN AN ACTIVITY
BASED ON WHO THEY ARE AND HOW
THEY IDENTIFY, THAT IS
DISCRIMINATION.
HOW WOULD YOU FEEL IF YOU WERE
TOLD THAT YOU WOULD STILL HAVE
TO WAIT A YEAR BEFORE YOU COULD
DONATE BLOOD?
A YEAR WHERE YOU HAD TO BE
CELIBATE BEFORE YOU COULD DONATE
BLOOD?
IT'S STILL UNFAIR.
IT'S NOT BASED IN SCIENCE.
>> Reporter: LOUIE BELIEVES ALL
POTENTIAL DONORS SHOULD HAVE
THEIR RISK FACTORS EVALUATED
INDIVIDUALLY, SUCH AS WHETHER A
MAN-- OR A WOMAN-- HAS MULTIPLE
SEXUAL PARTNERS, HAS UNPROTECTED
SEX OF ANY KIND, AND LACKS
AWARENESS OF HIS OR HER H.I.V.
STATUS.
>> IF YOU THINK ABOUT IT, WHAT
THIS POLICY IS SAYING IS THAT A
GAY MAN WHO IS IN A MONOGAMOUS
RELATIONSHIP IS AT HIGHER RISK
THAN A HETEROSEXUAL PERSON WHO
IS HAVING UNPROTECTED SEX WITH
SEVERAL PARTNERS.
AND THAT JUST ISN'T ACCURATE.
THAT'S NOT TRUE.
SO WE'RE LOOKING FOR A FAIR AND
SCIENCE-BASED APPROACH.
>> Reporter: BRIAN CUSTER, WHO
ADVOCATED FOR THE NEW 12-MONTH
DEFERRAL, STOPPED SHORT OF
RECOMMENDING COMPLETELY LIFTING
THE BAN, IN PART, BECAUSE
RESEARCH SHOWS THAT H.I.V.-
POSITIVE BLOOD DONORS WERE MORE
LIKELY TO REPORT A HISTORY OF
MALE-TO-MALE SEXUAL CONTACT THAN
DONORS WITHOUT H.I.V.
AND EVEN THOUGH TESTS ARE NOW
HIGHLY ACCURATE, THERE IS A SO-
CALLED "WINDOW PERIOD" OF UP TO
TEN DAYS WHEN A PERSON COULD
TEST NEGATIVE FOR H.I.V. EVEN
WHEN THEY ARE ACTUALLY POSITIVE.
>> IT'S NOT TRYING TO SAY THAT
ALL MEN WHO HAVE SEX WITH MEN,
EVEN IF THEY'RE SEXUALLY ACTIVE,
ARE AT HIGH RISK FOR H.I.V.
ACQUISITION OR ANYTHING LIKE
THIS.
BUT IT IS TRYING TO SAY THAT IN
TOTAL, THERE IS A HIGHER RISK
THERE, AND FOR THAT REASON, THIS
WAS SORT OF THE PLACE TO START A
CHANGE IN THIS DEFERRAL.
>> Reporter: WHILE IT'S A FELONY
IN MANY STATES TO KNOWINGLY
DONATE H.I.V.-INFECTED BLOOD,
BLOOD BANKING QUESTIONNAIRES
USED TO SCREEN POTENTIAL DONORS
DEPEND ON THE HONOR SYSTEM.
>> THEY ANSWER A SERIES OF ABOUT
50 QUESTIONS THAT COVER ANYTHING
FROM THEIR HEALTH HISTORY,
TRAVEL HISTORY, SEXUAL HISTORY.
NO STONE UNTURNED.
>> Reporter: YET RESEARCHERS AT
THE UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN AND
THE F.D.A. HAVE FOUND MANY MEN
WHO HAVE SEX WITH MEN "KNOWINGLY
DONATE DESPITE THE DEFERRAL."
THE F.D.A.'S DATA SHOWS H.I.V.
RATES FOR THOSE DONORS ARE MUCH
LOWER THAN EXPECTED.
>> IT IS CLEAR THAT MEN WHO HAVE
SEX WITH MEN, WHO COME TO DONATE
BLOOD, SEEM TO HAVE SELF-
SELECTED IN SOME WAY.
THAT BEING SAID, EVEN WITH THAT
SELF-SELECTION, THEIR RISK IS
MANY-FOLD HIGHER THAN A PERSON
WHO HAS SEX WITH AN INDIVIDUAL
OF THE OPPOSITE SEX, EVEN WITH
MULTIPLE INDIVIDUALS OF THE
OPPOSITE SEX, WHO COMES TO
DONATE.
>> Reporter: LAST MONTH THE
F.D.A. ANNOUNCED IT IS
REEVALUATING ITS BLOOD DONATION
POLICY YET AGAIN.
SAM BRINTON IS HOPEFUL THAT
ULTIMATELY THE BAN WILL BE
LIFTED.
WHY IS YOUR BLOOD SAFE?
>> IN THE END, IT'S SAFE BECAUSE
I'M SAFE.
I MAKE DECISIONS ABOUT MY SEXUAL
DESIRES AND MY SEXUAL ACTIVITIES
FROM A PLACE OF INTELLIGENCE.
WE RECOGNIZE THAT RISKS EXIST.
NO PERSON THAT IS GIVING BLOOD
DOESN'T THINK THAT RISK EXISTS.
WE JUST WANT IT TO BE MANAGED IN
A WAY THAT IS RESPECTFUL.
>> Stewart: READ ABOUT ONE MAN
WHO'S REMAINING CELIBATE FOR A
YEAR SO HE CAN DONATE BLOOD AND
DRAW ATTENTION TO THE BAN.
GO TO OUR WEB SITE,
www.pbs.org/newshour.
>> Stewart: SINCE THE AFFORDABLE
HEALTHCARE ACT, OFTEN CALLED
OBAMACARE, TOOK EFFECT THREE
YEARS AGO, MORE THAN 20 MILLION
MORE AMERICANS HAVE OBTAINED
HEALTH COVERAGE, A MAJORITY OF
THEM THROUGH FEDERAL AND STATE
EXCHANGES WITH INSURANCE
COMPANIES.
BUT THIS WEEK ONE OF THE
NATION'S LARGEST PRIVATE
INSURERS, AETNA, DECIDED TO DROP
OUT NEXT YEAR IN 11 OF THE 15
STATES WHERE IT OFFERS PLANS.
UNITED HEALTH GROUP AND HUMANA
HAVE MADE SIMILAR MARKET EXITS.
IN THIS MAP PUBLISHED TODAY, THE
"NEW YORK TIMES" SHOWS IN 2017,
17% OF AMERICANS ELIGIBLE FOR
OBAMACARE WILL HAVE ONLY ONE
PLAN FROM WHICH TO CHOSE.
THE PURPLE AREAS OFFER ONE PLAN,
AND THE PINK ONES, TWO.
"BLOOMBERG NEWS" HEALTHCARE
REPORTER ZACH TRACER JOINS ME
HERE IN THE STUDIO TO DISCUSS
THE PULLOUT AND ITS IMPACT.
OKAY, AETNA SAID THIS WAS A
BUSINESS DECISION, STRAIGHT
FORWARD.
WAS IT?
>> YOU KNOW, AETNA HAS SAID,
"LOOK, WE'RE LOSING A LOT OF
MONEY ON THE AFFORDABLE CARE
ACT, AND THIS IS NOT A MARKET WE
CAN AFFORD TO BE IN."
NOW, THE BIG QUESTION EVERYBODY
WANTS TO KNOW IS, WAS THIS
RELATED TO THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT'S MOVE TO BLOCK
AETNA'S TAKEOVER OF HUMANA.
ABOUT A MONTH AGO, THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT SUED TO STOP AETNA
FROM BUYING ANOTHER HEALTH
INSURER, HUMANA.
AND THERE IS SOME INDICATION
THIS MAY NOT HAVE BEEN ABOUT
FINANCIAL LOSSES.
>> Stewart: THE C.E.O. OF AETNA
WROTE A PRETTY DIRECT LETTER
SAYING WE NEED TO DO THIS OR WE
MIGHT NOT SHOW UP FOR 2017.
>> IN EARLY JULY, BEFORE THE
LAWSUIT, AETNA'S C.E.O. WROTE A
LETTER TO THE JUSTICE DEPARTMENT
IN RESPONSE TO SOME QUESTIONS
FROM D.O.J., ABOUT HOW THEM
POTENTIALLY BLOCKING THE DEAL
WOULD AFFECT HIS PLANS.
AND HE SAID, "LOOK, IF YOU SUE
TO BLOCK THIS DEAL, WE ARE GOING
TO PULL OUT."
AETNA SAYS, "THAT'S TRUE, BUT
THE REASON WE'LL PULLING OUT IS
OUR FINANCIAL RESULTS ARE
WORSENING.
THIS ISN'T RETALIATION."
BUT, CLEARLY, THIS IS A BIG
PULLBACK THAT CAME AFTER THAT
LAWSUIT.
>> Stewart: LET ME ASK YOU A
QUESTION ABOUT LANGUAGE.
AETNA'S C.E.O. SAID THEY'RE
LOSING MONEY.
ARE THEY LOSING MONEY OR JUST
NOT MAKING THE SAME AMOUNT OF
MONEY?
>> AETNA IS LOSING SOMETHING
LIKE $300 MILLION THIS YEAR ON
THE AFFORDABLE CARE ACT
EXTINCTION.
NOW, THEY'RE MAKING LOTS OF
MONEY IN OTHER BUSINESSES, AND
UNTIL NOW THEY'VE BEEN WILLING
TO SAY THE WAIT-AND-SEE HOW THIS
PARTICULAR BUSINESS WORKED OUT.
YOU KNOW, THERE ARE NOT THAT
MANY PLACES IN THE U.S. WHERE AS
A HEALTH INSURER YOU CAN PICK UP
BUSINESS.
MOST FOLKS ALREADY HAVE HEALTH
INSURANCE.
SO THE AFFORDABLE CARE ACT WAS A
NEW MARKET OPPORTUNITY FOR THESE
GUYS.
>> Stewart: THAT WAS ONE OF
THE TALKING POINTS ABOUT IT, TO
GET NEW INSURERS, NEW PEOPLE TO
INSURE.
THAT DIDN'T HAPPEN?
>> AETNA HAS SOMETHING LIKE
800,000 NEW CUSTOMERS.
SO SOME NICE GROWTH.
THE PROBLEM IS RIGHT NOW THEY'RE
NOT MAKING MONEY ON IT.
>> Stewart: CAN YOU EXPLAIN TO
ME WHY AETNA SAID IT'S LOSING SO
MUCH MONEY ON OBAMACARE?
>> AETNA SAID THEY ENDED UP WITH
SICKER, OLDER CUSTOMERS THAN
THEY EXPECTED.
THERE ARE OTHER THINGS GOING ON,
MAYBE AROUND THE EDGES, PEOPLE
GAMING THE EXCHANGES, PEOPLE
SIGNING UP FOR COVERAGE, GETTING
A COSTLY SURGERY OR PROCEDURE
AND THEN DROPPING OUT.
THE MAIN THING APPEARS PEOPLE
WERE SICKER THAN AETNA EXPECTED.
YOUNG, HEALTHY PEOPLE HAVE
STAYED AWAY FROM THE EXCHANGES,
MAYBE MORE THAN ANYONE THOUGHT
THAT THEY WOULD.
THESE ARE NOT INEXPENSIVE
POLICIES, THOUGH, OF COURSE,
THERE ARE SUBSIDIES TO HELP
PEOPLE AFFORD THEM.
BUT, YOU KNOW, IF YOU'RE A
YOUNG, HEALTHY PERSON, IT'S A
LOT OF MONEY AND YOU MAY JUST
SAY, YOU KNOW, I'M GOING TO TAKE
MY CHANCES," EVEN THOUGH THERE
ARE THESE FINANCIAL PENALTIES
FOR NOT BUYING INSURANCE.
>> Stewart: AT LEAST ONE
CRITIC I READ OF THIS MOVE SAID
THESE COMPANIES LIKE AETNA AND
UNITED HEALTH JUST ARE DOING
BUSINESS A DIFFERENT WAY.
THERE ARE COMPANIES THAT HAVE
DONE BUSINESS WITH EXCHANGES
WHICH ARE DOING JUST FINE, THAT
THEY HAVE NOT ADJUSTED TO THE
MARKETPLACE.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
THERE ARE COMPANIES THAT ARE
DOING WELL THAT SAY THEY'RE
MAKING MONEY ON THE EXCHANGES.
SO THERE'S CLEARLY SOME
STRATEGIES, SOME THINGS INSURERS
ARE DOING THAT ARE WORKING.
BUT SO FAR, LIKE YOU MENTIONED,
UNITED, HUMANA, AETNA, THE REAL
BIG NATIONAL INSURERS, JUST
DON'T APPEAR TO HAVE HIT ON
THESE WINNING STRATEGIES.
>> Stewart: SO I'M SOMEONE WHO
WAS IN THIS EXCHANGE WITH AETNA.
WHAT DO I DO IN 2017?
>>, YOU KNOW, IT'S GOING TO BE A
PROBLEM FOR FOLKS.
THEY'RE GOING TO LOSE THEIR
AETNA COVERAGE AS OF JANUARY 1,
2017.
SO THAT MEANS THAT PEOPLE HAVE
THAT AETNA POLICIES THROUGH THE
EXCHANGE IN ONE OF THE 11 STATES
THAT THEY'RE PULLING OUT OF,
THOSE PEOPLE ARE GOING TO NEED
TO GO AND SHOP AND FOUND A NEW
HEALTH PLAN.
>> Stewart: ZACH TRACER FROM
"BLOOMBERG NEWS."
THANKS A LOT.
>> THANK YOU.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Stewart: IN EUROPE TODAY,
HUNDREDS OF MIGRANTS WERE
RESCUED ON THE MEDITERRANEAN
SEA.
SPANISH RESCUERS SAVED 200
MIGRANTS, MAINLY FROM AFRICA,
WHO WERE PACKED INTO RUBBER
RAFTS FLOATING FEWER THAN
20 MILES FROM THE LIBYAN COAST.
SEPARATELY, 300 MIGRANTS RESCUED
BY ITALIAN SHIPS WERE BROUGHT TO
SICILY TODAY, ALONG WITH THE
BODIES OF FIVE WHO DROWNED.
THE INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATION
FOR MIGRATION SAYS WHILE 100,000
MIGRANTS AND REFUGEES HAVE
REACHED ITALY THIS YEAR-- MANY
AFTER LEAVING FROM LIBYA--
ALMOST 3,000 HAVE DROWNED
TRYING.
TURKEY IS PROMISING TO TAKE A
MORE ACTIVE ROLE TO STOP THE
FIVE-YEAR-OLD WAR IN NEIGHBORING
SYRIA.
PRIME MINISTER BINALI YILDIRIM
SAID THAT WHILE SYRIAN PRESIDENT
BASHAR AL-ASSAD COULD PLAY A
ROLE DURING A TRANSITION, HE
SHOULD HAVE NO ROLE IN THE
COUNTRY'S FUTURE.
THE PRIME MINISTER ALSO URGED
THE UNITED STATES TO SPEED UP
THE EXTRADITION IT HAS REQUESTED
OF CLERIC FETHULLAH GULEN, WHO
LIVES IN PENNSYLVANIA.
TURKEY ACCUSES OF GULEN OF
INSTIGATING LAST MONTH'S FAILED
MILITARY COUP, WHICH HE DENIES.
REUTERS REPORTS U.S. STATE AND
JUSTICE DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS ARE
PLANNING TO VISIT TURKEY TO
DISCUSS THE CASE.
IN YEMEN TODAY, THERE WAS A
MASSIVE SHOW OF SUPPORT FOR A
NEWLY-FORMED GOVERNING COUNCIL.
HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS
DEMONSTRATED IN THE REBEL-HELD
CAPITAL OF SANAA.
THEY WERE SHOWING SUPPORT FOR
THE COUNCIL LED BY FORMER
PRESIDENT ALI ABDULLAH SALEH,
THOUGH IT'S BEEN REJECTED BY
YEMEN'S INTERNATIONALLY
RECOGNIZED GOVERNMENT.
6,500 PEOPLE HAVE DIED IN THE
16-MONTH CIVIL WAR BETWEEN
SHIITE REBELS AND A SAUDI-LED,
U.S.-BACKED COALITION SUPPORTING
THE GOVERNMENT.
UNITED NATIONS-SPONSORED PEACE
TALKS COLLAPSED EARLIER THIS
MONTH.
ON TOMORROW'S PROGRAM, THE
LIONFISH "INVASION" THREATENING
MARINE LIFE OFF THE COAST OF
FLORIDA AND BEYOND, AND WHAT'S
BEING DONE TO STOP IT.
>> WE DON'T KNOW HOW BAD THIS IS
GOING TO GET.
WE COULD SEE EXTINCTIONS OF SOME
SPECIES OF FISH DUE TO LIONFISH
PREDATION.
>> Stewart: THAT'S TOMORROW ON
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>> Stewart: FINALLY, CROSS IT IF
YOU DARE.
TODAY, CHINA OPENED THE WORLD'S
HIGHEST AND LONGEST GLASS-BOTTOM
BRIDGE.
THE 1,400-FOOT-LONG PEDESTRIAN
BRIDGE IS PAVED WITH 99 PANELS
OF THREE-LAYERED TRANSPARENT
GLASS AND SPANS A MOUNTAIN
RAVINE IN HUNAN PROVINCE.
OFFICIALS INSIST THE BRIDGE IS
TOTALLY SAFE.
IT BETTER BE.
IT'S ALMOST 1,000 FEET DOWN TO
THE GROUND.
AND IN THE SUMMER OLYMPICS IN
RIO DE JANEIRO, THE U.S. WOMEN'S
BASKETBALL TEAM CRUSHED SPAIN
FOR THE SIXTH GOLD MEDAL IN A
ROW.
THE U.S. MEN GO FOR A THIRD GOLD
MEDAL IN A ROW IN BASKETBALL
TOMORROW AGAINST SERBIA.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M ALISON STEWART.
GOOD NIGHT.